NDS4MiSTer v0.9.0-rc.2

START HERE

Extract the install ZIP to the SD card root, merging Scripts. Include the
hidden Scripts/.NDS_Standalone folder. Run Scripts -> NDS4MiSTer.
Choose Load *.NDS. Use .. at the top to browse to your game folder.

There is no separate Kickstart step or five-minute launch window. This
release starts its matching core and ARM helper itself. Normal MiSTer is
stopped while you play and restored through System -> Reboot. That menu
action returns to normal MiSTer; it does not power-cycle the board.

Installation updates the standalone program files. It preserves your normal
Console NDS core and Kickstart installation, games, saves, saved controller
maps, existing configuration and MiSTer.ini. Do not replace the entire
Scripts folder or mix support files from different releases. No Linux kernel
or commercial ROM/BIOS/firmware files are included.

REQUIREMENTS

An existing working MiSTer installation, a runtime able to execute the
launcher, and a kernel compatible with the included write-combining module
and 1 GHz clock control are required. Hardware testing used Linux
5.15.1-MiSTer. The launcher checks Python 3.8+, required system tools, matching
files, clock control and write-combining before takeover. It does not install
dependencies or force-load a mismatched kernel module.

GAMES AND SAVES

Use uncompressed .nds files. The loader accepts supported layouts up to
512 MiB; ZIP files and DSi mode are not supported. Certain larger images use
unsupported data regions and are rejected before loading. File size alone
does not guarantee game compatibility.

Games may be on mounted SD, USB or network storage. Use .. at the top of
Load *.NDS to go up; from the device root, .. shows mounted devices. The SD
card appears as fat and USB drives as usb0, usb1, etc. Enter folders normally.
The last browsed games folder is remembered automatically across restarts.
If only one mounted games/NDS exists on first use, it opens automatically;
otherwise the browser shows the devices. Unmounted USB placeholders are hidden.

Drives and shares must already be mounted by MiSTer. This feature does not
mount shares or change network configuration. A missing saved device offers
Retry, Browse and Back without erasing its remembered location. USB filesystem
UUIDs are used when available to follow a drive if its usb number changes;
otherwise the saved mount point is used.

Cartridge saves remain in /media/fat/saves/NDS on the SD card, shared with
normal MiSTer, even for external games. Keep a game's filename unchanged to
use its matching .sav. Save using
the game itself; save states are not included. Exit through System -> Reboot
when finished so outstanding writes can complete.

The initial default is Top/Bottom, rotation Off and FPS counter Off. Existing
standalone settings, or normal NDS settings when standalone has none, take
priority. Both DS graphics engines are always On, including when an older
configuration had Engine B Off. There is no Engine B On/Off option.

Browser folders save automatically to /media/fat/config/NDS_storage.cfg.
Recent Files retain the shared MiSTer list and NDS_recent_locations.cfg beside
it to remember drive identities. Save settings is not needed for locations.
USB/HDD and network-share behavior has simulated coverage; real external-drive
validation is still outstanding. SD browser navigation was tested on hardware.

MENU AND CONTROLS

Open with F12, the OSD button or your controller's configured menu combination.
Select + Start or Guide can open it on an unmapped controller.
The menu does not pause gameplay; pause inside the game when needed.

  Up/Down             Move through choices
  A / Enter           Select
  B / Escape          Go back
  Right / Left        System / core page, or page through the file picker
  Select / backtick   Recent Files at Load *.NDS or in the file picker

System -> Define NDS buttons maps game controls. Its final binding,
Cycle Video Layout, switches layouts once per press without resetting.
System -> Save settings stores options for later launches. Standalone's
saved settings and controller maps remain separate from normal MiSTer.
Greyed-out System rows are not implemented. Use normal MiSTer for global
video/audio filters, Bluetooth pairing and other unsupported settings.

Keyboard gameplay: arrows=D-pad, X/Z=A/B, S/A=X/Y, Q/W=L/R,
Right Shift=Select, Enter=Start, Space=Touch. Mouse movement/left click and
a mapped right stick/Touch button control the touch screen.

OPTIONAL: ORIGINAL DS FIRMWARE MENU

Normal game loading uses the built-in BIOS and generated firmware. You do
not need any external BIOS/firmware files to load games.

To use Boot DS firmware, keep these original files together in a folder on
mounted SD, USB or network storage (games/NDS is still a valid choice):
  bios7.bin      16,384 bytes; supported Nintendo DS BIOS
  bios9.bin       4,096 bytes; supported Nintendo DS BIOS
  firmware.bin  262,144 bytes; supported DS/DS Lite firmware image

SHA-256 reference hashes (the original files used in accepted testing):
ba65f690eb04ec92db67c0e299e21ad71de087d6d5de8a9cb17a62eaab563c17  bios7.bin
1693983a7707ae394786fa526c0552457888a51d4e410d715ef07acd5a540555  bios9.bin
330c59198faec64b40e96cc875b422d340fc9ab1a9e32e9bd9b7baa1dbe6ba7f  firmware.bin

Compare your original files, not the saved copy in saves/NDS. Different
firmware revisions and personal settings produce different hashes; the
firmware hash above identifies the tested image rather than a universal
compatibility requirement. The saved firmware hash changes after edits.

To check on MiSTer, enter the folder holding your originals, for example:
  cd /media/fat/games/NDS
  sha256sum bios7.bin bios9.bin firmware.bin

Choose Boot DS firmware. If its remembered folder and all three files are
available, it boots directly without a folder picker or Reading storage screen.
Otherwise it opens the browser: navigate with ..
and select firmware.bin. The firmware folder is remembered independently of
the game browser. On first use it starts in the games folder; a missing drive
opens the device list. bios7.bin and bios9.bin must be beside firmware.bin.
Wait for the health screen and tap/release Touch.
The firmware GUI starts without a cartridge. Start games from Load *.NDS.

Change your nickname, birthday, favorite color or language in the DS settings.
Saved changes are stored directly in saves/NDS/firmware.bin, with
firmware.bin.previous beside it as the previous working image. These files
belong with your other saves. There is no firmware subfolder. Original BIOS
and firmware in the selected source folder are never rewritten by this feature.

Games still use the built-in firmware, with those four personal settings
copied in. Without a valid saved personal profile the nickname is MiSTer.
Touch calibration, Wi-Fi credentials and other private firmware data are not
copied into the built-in game profile. The user's own original dumps and saved
firmware are not part of the installer or source archive.

Native firmware compatibility is limited. Supported BIOS CRC32 values are
1280F0D5 (bios7) and 2AB23573 (bios9). The firmware must have valid structure
and checksums. The current virtual touch path requires both calibration
points on each axis to satisfy ADC = pixel * 16; a physical DS calibration
may not match. The launcher rejects unsupported calibration while preserving
the original. The DS calibration utility is not a supported setup procedure
for this release. Use a compatible personal dump; do not bypass validation.

The firmware clock starts from the MiSTer's system time (year 2000-2099).
Clock edits are session-only, and RTC alarm interrupts are not implemented.
This feature does not add DS wireless multiplayer, firmware game launching,
DSi mode, or microphone input.

TATE AND OPTIONAL 1080P

Choose Video Layout -> Top/Bottom. Rotate the picture opposite to the
physical monitor turn: 90 CCW for clockwise, 90 CW for counterclockwise.
D-pad, mouse and touch directions follow the rotated display.

The menu rotates separately. For a 1080p-capable portrait screen:

  [NDS]
  video_mode=8
  osd_rotate=2

video_mode=8 selects 1920x1080 at 60 Hz. Omit it if the display does not
support that mode. Whole-pixel scaling can leave small borders. Use
osd_rotate=1 if the menu is upside down, or 0 for an unrotated menu. Edit an
existing [NDS] section rather than adding a duplicate. Return to normal
MiSTer and relaunch to apply changes. These NDS settings also affect the
older normal NDS core; other core sections stay unchanged.

TROUBLESHOOTING

Script missing: Check Scripts/NDS4MiSTer.sh and the hidden .NDS_Standalone
support folder are at the SD root, not inside an extra ZIP-name folder.

Missing requirement or SHA-256 error: Record the displayed error. Re-extract
the matching release files for a checksum mismatch. A kernel compatibility
error needs a compatible kernel; this installer does not replace the kernel.

Cannot find firmware.bin: Use .. to browse to the folder with your originals.
The firmware browser only shows directories and firmware.bin. If selecting it
fails, the dialog names the first missing or invalid file; check bios7.bin and
bios9.bin beside it. Normal games do not need these files. A saved profile alone does not replace
the required original BIOS and firmware for native boot.

Firmware settings problem: Keep the saved current and previous copies.
Correct the reported storage/image problem before relaunching. Do not copy
an old stock image over saves/NDS/firmware.bin unless you intend to discard
the saved personal changes.

Slow network ROM loading: Reads run separately so the launcher stays alive.
Loading times out after 120 seconds with no file progress, not after
120 seconds total. Directory reads, firmware-source reads and Recent Files
checks run separately, are cancellable and time out after 15 seconds if they
do not finish. Retry or browse another device. Copying games to the SD card
avoids network delays.

Disconnected Wi-Fi: The launcher stops disconnected host Wi-Fi retries for
that boot. Connected Wi-Fi and saved settings stay intact. Connect the share
before launching if your ROMs are on the network. Reboot restores normal
host Wi-Fi startup. This is unrelated to DS wireless multiplayer.

Display issue after editing INI: Restore the previous NDS video setting and
relaunch. Use 1080p only on a compatible display. The installer does not edit
the INI or install your test machine's display/controller configuration.

Crash: Recovery attempts to return to normal MiSTer. A full kernel/FPGA hang
can still require a power cycle. Report game/version, scene, SD or network,
kernel, controller and the exact error; do not attach ROMs or BIOS dumps.

PERFORMANCE AND KNOWN LIMITATIONS

Both ARM cores stay at 1 GHz with write-combining, overclocked from the
standard 800 MHz. This clock setting is unchanged from the accepted build. No overclock setting
is exposed. The accepted renderer/pacing settings are retained. The tested
USA revision0 of NSMB uses alternate drawing updates to reduce work; this is
not a global FPS cap. The 3D FPS Counter reports publication activity, which
can include reused images; it is not proof of 60 unique frames per second.

Some slowdown, surging, uneven animation, movie/audio hitches and graphical
problems remain. Strange Journey can still freeze in its intro; GTA can
still clip near the camera. Not all games, controllers, alternate INIs or
display changes have been tested. Sound is experimental. Cartridge saves
are supported; save states, NAND cartridge saves and DS wireless multiplayer
are not implemented. No claim of universal full-speed operation is made.

SOURCE AND CREDITS

The public release uses GitHub's Source code (zip)/(tar.gz) links for matching
source. The install ZIP and its SHA-256 companion are the only release assets;
there is no duplicate source ZIP asset. Internal checksums accompany both.

Built on work from the MiSTer community, FPGAzumSpass, Nitro_DarkSide and
melonDS contributors, heni, and InsaneFriend (GitHub: saneFriend). Thanks to
Corn for the standalone suggestion and skmp, the DreamSTer developer.
Full credits and licenses are included in the source tree.
